so I'm very happy to meet you and to see
you
online
um so I'm I'm trained uh as an
historian of what we call the early
modern period of French and European
history that is the period from the
Renaissance to the French Revolution
roughly
speaking and I've actually worked on a
number of different topics within this
period
even extending it into the Medieval
World and and forward into the 19th
century um I think a lot of my work
always is in some ways uh a reflection
not necessarily A A knee-jerk reaction
but a
reflection of contemporary
concerns I did a book most recently on
Animal Human Relationships and thinking
about in particular
the way in which animals are are figured
and represented in a political
context at the courts of uh Louis the
14th in
France I've also done a lot of work on
immigration on the history of
nationality on
citizenship all very hot topics
especially in in France since the
1990s but I started my career actually
uh work working on peasant
rebellions and uh that's what I'll be
revisiting in part uh talking to you
today so as I was starting to say here
among um the live voices I I started uh
getting interested in Collective
resistance and rebellion in the 1970s at
University and at the time the kind of
history that we were reading to make
sense of this was very much what are now
the classics of a kind of history from
below so Eric Hobs bound's primitive
Rebels which came out in 1959 and EP
Thompson's making of the English working
class which came out in 1968 and then
for me in particular the work of Natalie
Zeman Davis the American cultural
historian who collected her essays in a
volume called society and culture
in early modern France uh in
1973 and she had two essays in
particular one was called women on
top uh and the other was called the
rights of this rule RIT so both of them
were ways of thinking about moments
of moments of symbolic
inversion in ritual and everyday life
that reduced
alternative readings of uh of the social
order
so I got interested in carnival through
that in particular because I was taken
uh obsessed even at the time with a
series of peasant
rebell
sorry a series of of peasant
rebellions uh that began in uh
1829 in the southern French department
or region of the arz in the purines and
lasted uh at least the bulk of it for
about three years and coincided in part
with the July
Revolution uh of 1830 in
Paris
and in one way these were rebellions
like any other in the sense that they
were PE communities that
mobilized uh to resist the imposition of
a national forest
code uh the forest code of
1827 which specifically targeted their
Usef fruct rights their use rights to
the forest which included not just the
ability uh or the necessity of gathering
firewood and using the forest for
building materials or for or for tools
and instruments but also the need to
pasture their animals herds of sheep for
the most part and goats uh in the forest
especially during this important
transhuman cycle when the when the herds
move up to the mountain pastures through
the forest for some weeks and then when
they come back down in there and the
reason this is important is because this
was
a this was a subsistence uh system but
it was not simply agricultural it was
Pasto Agricultural and in the sense that
the keeping stock
raising um was essential to agriculture
because of the the dung that was
harvested especially in the
forest uh which was essential for the
fertility of of the otherwise quite
Barren and sterile agricultural lands so
it kind of made sense that they would
Revolt because there had been previous
efforts to impose a kind of call it the
geometric Spirit of forest management
these abstract Universal conceptions of
space what what Jim Scott called
thinking like a state uh and there had
been an attempt in the 17th century to
do this but it had failed miserably
because uh The Peasant communities were
largely protected by altitude by
Distance by the difficulty of access and
at the time it didn't really make sense
um to push hard on the commercialization
of of the forest or of the wood and and
or secure for the king what the
ordinance thought to do which was uh the
old growth force to be used in Naval
construction so the peasants had sort of
escaped that dodg that bullet but by
1827 uh the pressures of a capitalist
order
uh were being felt not just uh for the
commercial exploitation of the wood but
also for the use of of wood in the
production of pig iron so the region was
dotted with these foundaries they're
called Calon
forges uh which consume these vast
quantities of wood and they were owned
by um
Bourgeois inheritors or Heirs of the
great Noble Estates that had they had
picked them up during the French
Revolution and they were they were now
really turning the screws and and sort
of pushing back and
so what the forco did besides
universally prohibited everything that
the peasants needed was also to uh
really formally prohibit and dismantle a
whole system of forest management that
the ways in which in the this local
Society over
centuries ecologically sound practices
of forest
management uh were put into place and
even though they looked like
chaotic ways of managing the forest from
the outside they actually had this kind
of inner logic to them this ecological
this ecol logic to
them and they were uh when that says oh
my
necessary necessary to
um to the to the peasant way of life
so of course one might say there was
rebellion and there were rebellions
elsewhere in France but what what
captured my attention and what got into
my head or under my skin was this
was these peasants who basically
disguised themselves or at least
partially disguised
themselves uh with masks with blacken
faces with castoff military uniforms and
the paraphernalia of army armies and so
on but mostly with this disguise as
women which is where why we call the
events the war of the demoiselle or the
maidens war war of the young
maidens which the disguise was just
remark simple they they they basically
had these nice white linen shirts that
they used on festive occasions and so
they took out these shirts and instead
of tucking them in they they wore them
outside and they tied a belt on the top
and it looked kind of like a a
dress and so so attired they went into
the forest mostly at night and in a very
clamorous
noisy and festive
kind of Revolt they chased out the
forest guards uh and the charcoal makers
from the forest and they scared them to
death quite literally so it was it was
not it was not a violent Rebellion they
were not shooting people they were
shooting the guns in the air they were
making noise they were frightening them
and so
on so for me that was the great problem
is you know how to explain the
particular form that this Rebellion took
so my my journey into the forest and
explaining this for him on the one hand
it took me deep into the effort to
reconstruct an entire peasant Universe
an entire
cosmology that was in our words
Enchanted animistic that involved
thinking of the forest in in fact not
just material but spiritual terms
and in identifying very much its
feminine qualities so that in part it
was a question of tracking down the folk
tales and uh traces of
um stories of these female fairies in
the forest who actually were kind of a
model for the rioter they were
vindictive they exercised a kind of
retributive Justice they were associated
with fertility and like in part of was
tracking down uh ideas of the forest
that had been dismantled by the
Scientific Revolution in the 17th
century by what the historian of science
carollyn merch called the death of
nature which put into place a kind of
inert
matter uh that replaced very much an
animistic
vitalist uh organic universe and and
that in particular
referred to the forest uh as a feminine
being so uh that was one track to
explain um the this feminized and
ritualistic uh
notion but there was another track which
was even more fertile in this sense and
that was the one that uh that led me to
Carnival which is uh I take it now the
subject of of our of our discussion
tonight so what became clear to me uh
and I wasn't the first to see it was the
way in which uh popular folk cultural
festivities and in particular the
carnival formed part of the
repertoire on which peasants Drew to
legitimate in their own minds to
legitimate their actions their
Collective actions and they orchestrated
in a very theatrical mode uh a carnival
beyond the bounds of seasonality which
had defined
it using the symbolism the ritual
practices the tropes of inversion and so
on uh to really insist
on the kind of subversive and uh uh
elements of
protest uh against the forest coast so
it got me thinking about Carnival more
generally and I wanted to share one or
two
thoughts where maybe I can end after
that and we can begin a
discussion so part of the problem is an
historian studying
Carnival I mean it's different if you're
looking at carnival today if you're able
to actually attend a carnival and
witness it
um is that in
history Carnival's only only get
noticed when they're
instrumentalized when they're being used
for something
else so for
example when we talk about bakine and
rabet and Carnival when we try to
reconstruct the festive life of popular
culture in the 15th and early 16th
century we're doing so through literary
two sets of literary critics separated
by 300 400 years who each have their own
uses of Carnival in other words we're
not approaching in any way and we would
be on a Fool's aing to think
that um as Bakin sometimes indicates to
us that ramay is a kind of transparent
window onto popular culture you're
scar um I mean he's not it's mediated in
all sorts of projects of R most of which
have nothing to do with popular culture
right
nonetheless teasing out the sources
teasing out the
filters allows us to see what uses he is
making of it right and in the same way
with this peasant revolt
I'm able to
see uh the ways in which again it's
instrumentalized as a set of
practices with another goal in mind in
this case the goal of
rebellion or
resistance now that's not to say that
it's not possible to imagine and to
think about
Carnival uh except through these
mediations and in fact in my own
experience and in the book that I I did
do on this that came out in
1994 one of the ways in which I did it
was to think about Carnival in a
comparative ethnographic
context and to compare it with in fact a
whole series of
calendrical ritual
celebrations among societies as
farfetched as
uh you know melanesians celebrating
milaa and the swazi in Africa
celebrating the
inaa these were big sort of cosmic
celebrations at the end of the year that
marked the passing between the death of
winter and the birth of spring they were
tied to fertility but they were also
very much
expressions of what the classicist
George Dil called the Dual
representation of of
sovereignty and here for me was a really
interesting way of starting to think
about
Carnival which actually has its Echoes
very much and I was so pleased to read
them in David graver's work uh in his
prehistorical work if you will uh on the
origins of of
everything in which he talked about at
one point the kind of seasonality of
sovereignty
as a moment in
which cultures societies could
experiment without necessarily locking
in to one form of sovereignty or
another my own interpretation was was
much more structural and much less
improvisational um than his and it was
very much informed in some ways by a
kind of classic structuralism
of Ley Strauss and of Dil
himself uh in the 70s and it was about
thinking of Carnival very
much as a moment within a festive cycle
of sovereignty in which the calendar
year was
itself structured in a way to Forefront
at different
moments these different articul ation or
expressions of sovereignty one that was
youthful creative subversive the world
upside down the
carnivalesque the other was following
D's lead the world of
Gravitas of seriousness of State
hierarchy of of rigidity and so
on
so of the many things that I might say
about about Bak teen's reading of R's
reading of the carnival one of the
things that I miss in Bak whom I
adore but for not necessarily the
obvious reasons but one of the things I
miss in his understanding of Carnival is
very much the importance of
seasonality and the importance of the
temporal dimension of Carnival as it's
celebrated at a particular moment
within the festive
cycle it's really interesting that
bakine
himself virtually ignores or passes over
the one episode especially in book three
in which Carnival is really positioned
as a seasonal festival for him the
seasonality is not there it's not about
season it's about
structure it's about the way the
carnivalesque appears wherever in the
marketplace and at the fair in these
different
spaces but not necessarily tied or
linked to the calendar season so for him
the whole idea of a festive moment you
know structured
between um Pat Tuesday and lent and then
expanded often to include three or four
months if not half the year um doesn't
doesn't resonate in in his theory his
theory is much more about the spaces of
the carnival s than the timing of the
carnival s
so should I in
there I'll stop there there's obviously
more to say but okay yeah thank you
Peter and uh yeah so oh my God it's like
people
waiting
uh yeah for somebody who who come just
now Peter just finished his uh short
introduction to Carnaval and to his
book uh and yeah maybe
hey yeah happy
Halloween um so I don't know should we
start discussion um uh if how would we
do that if anybody have questions who is
like oh yeah I see something I can't
hear well oh the the sound is not really
working
was the sound working guys well there's
muting going on
huh
uh
okay okay okay I I can try and turn
it
so one second
so while we um yeah so I don't know who
is anybody wants to talk maybe uh just
uh okay just start or put up the
hand uh yeah or I can ask questions
oh yeah I know that
Claire has a lot of experience with
Carnaval and carnavalesque in real life
and uh yeah
maybe uh it will be good to talk to
somebody who who actually did a lot in
carnivals I do also have a question the
first one
yes second CLA are you talking I don't
here wa no no I'm not speaking I um I'll
let the person um in the G speak first
and then I'll say
something um yeah just for some it it
was very interesting what you were
saying about seasonaly but just wanted
some clarification about what the kind
of connotations are that he want to draw
out there
and there was an interesting moment I've
not seen anyone write about it where I
mean he says all kinds of things but um
like a month ago um Trump in one of his
speeches said something like um when I'm
President we will have one day we'll
have one day where anyone can do
anything they want and it's interesting
that like as part of his actual
obviously very um top down he is going
to be authoritarian but don't worry
everyone you're going to have one day
there's one kind of view
of because seasonality I think it's
interesting because there's a kind of
inevitability there that isn't to do
with yeah the
that's kind of Beyond any particular
local um happenings and I wondered
whether you're saying that it's almost
like an emerging property of Societies
or is it almost like a necessity that
anyone who is in this position of
royalty um or a trump figure in order to
sustain their power and they do it or
we've got the space of the forest the
just always been there as part of
society and it's this kind of Bot bottom
up season in the sense that almost like
like a natural structure
right well I think the reference to
Trump is interesting but it it
refers uh really to a modern you know
post agrarian po
industrial World in which what he's
playing with
is is his capacity to actually structure
the
calendar the kind of calendrical
festivities that I were talking I was
referring
to are not subjected to this
discretionary authority of the
ruler or if they are that's one of the
uses then to which festivity could be
made Banning Carnival for example in
order to assert power but these again
are kind of structured
Collective uh rituals and
practices independent of any choice of
sovereign um in that regard uh which
presents in very much theatrical form
but not theatrical in the sense of
dividing Spectators and participants but
theatrical in the sense sense of
dramatizing the principles at stake uh
the the these festivities very much take
place you know in a kind of coherent and
unfolding logical order then that gets
repeated the next year and repeated the
next year and the next year and so on so
again you know for me the contrast and
interpretation would be less with uh you
know kind of modern
wannabe dictators attempt to reinstitute
or to regulate this then interrogating
well you know what does
it what does it
mean and here I'm having this
conversation my head with David which is
you know his argument that it presents
every year a set of possibilities
about the way in which political order
might be
organized it's
useless to say and try to judge is it
subversive is it
conservative you know those are the
wrong questions it's both and at once it
kind of depends on to what ends it's
being instrumentalized in that sense but
what's important you know in David's
work for David was the fact that it
happened and that it presented on an
annual basis this opening of space where
people could imagine other possible
worlds like
that in my view you know I I'm not
saying that's wrong by any means but I
but I want to structure it even more uh
I I don't want to think of it as just
you know a kind of open
space
of experimen
which I think it
is but I think it stands in some
important structural relationship to
what goes on the rest of the
year and that the alternance between
these modes of
governance between hierarchical
authoritarian forms of rule and these
bottom up world upside down you know
carnivalist things is an important way
in which sovereignty is actually
constituted in a society they're
necessary parts of the same equation
they don't exist
antagonistically or
independently of each other I know it's
a little abstract and I can I apologize
for that can I explore that I mean my my
experience was I'm not an academic one
of Carnival it was of of discovering
Caribbean Carnival in London when I was
quite young back in the 70s and
one of the things for the carnivalist
that I worked with was that it wasn't
about the day the carnival day was just
an event that happened in public but the
real Carnival was the mass Camp the mass
Camp was the Masquerade Camp the place
where you built Carnival where you know
you you would spend months before
Carnival building out to it and in a
sense the mass Camp was the inversion of
the industrial production place because
it was a place where people went after
work voluntarily unpaid to chant smoke
dop interes make things um to do things
you know learn skills and and actually
it was a very physical inversion of an
industrial space and I think that just
looking at carnival as an event on the
street misses out because if you don't
spend time in Mass camps you don't see
that kind of you experience it and and I
think that inversion
happens over a long time in preparation
come and I mean now I think perhaps many
of those elements have disappeared as
youth clubs kind of you know sanitize
that experience all like we sorry to
interrupt you all like in this
discussion and some V about Carnival you
remember the the local people was saying
that the Chinese are coming with like
super like glorious things that you can
buy online and all this like carnivalist
workshops they just D out because it's
too complicated to there's
transformation going on but but I just
want to broaden that point that Carnival
is not necessarily or the carnival I
experience not necessarily just that
event but it's all the things and the
social dynamics that surround it and and
make
it if nobody has anything I really
appreciate that point because what it
does for me is to help understand how
Carnival
survives even in a modern world where
it's performed for spectators where the
division between audience and celebrant
is very marked so I've been to Marty gr
New Orleans and you know it's striking
the
barriers put up and I never thought
about the back end as it
were and the way in which and we were
talking earlier about
prefiguration you know the way in which
it's actually put
together you know many CS are asleep
during Carnival they're just exhausted
yeah um just wait sorry like clear yeah
yeah
um I'm not sure that that's NE I'm I'm
not sure that that's I totally agree
with you about Pro process but my
background is in in creating big public
feasts that take over public spaces on
Bridges and in huge public areas in
London and people grow food and they
take the time to look at the
relationships between the celebration
and the growing cycle and the
reunification of culture and Agriculture
and then they take up public space in
order to cook and prepare and to eat
that food together and that's all sorts
of people from all sorts of backgrounds
and it takes like a year in order to
prepare it and do it and whatever and I
although I agree with you John about the
process I don't agree that you
necessarily have to have that um
difference between participant and
audience in something like that and I
think that you can create spaces even
now where
you're in in a non-romantic way bringing
together the relationship between the
growing cycle and the celebration and
that there's enough of that that still
kind of exists whatever the form is um
now that allows people to tap into that
in their imagination and to have a time
that's outside of anything else and
create
new public memory around those kinds of
things especially if you're in a space
that's normally taken up
with cars and business and whatever but
I'm just interested in the
instrumentalization as well because I
wonder whether I wonder what you think
about something like the rebel clown
Army that would came out of the um Road
protest movement in the UK and whether
that instrumentalized
instrumentalization of something that is
kind of carnivalesque um but I think is
actually super clever when you use it in
that type of resistance is something
that you think I I can't quite tell what
you're saying about in mentalization
whether you think that that's something
that slightly bastardized the form in
some
way no not at all actually I'm not
particularly familiar with the case
though I I I do think I know what you're
referring to there's nothing negative in
the way I'm using the term
instrumentalization there's nothing that
I'm uh intending to take away from from
Carnival or
from from all that that it represents my
remark was only based on the fact that
as an
historian when I get to read about
Carnival in the archival
sources I read about it because it's
been instrumentalized in some way or
another that
is ordinary Carnival that's celebrated
year in and year out in peasant
communities and urban settings or
whatever escapes from the archives
because nobody has a problem with it
nobody tries to do anything with
it when a carnival is repressed or when
a carnival is used in a context of
rebellion that's when it becomes present
it leaves traces it becomes
visible so that the observation was only
about that to begin
with uh it's not about the the
non-instrumental existence of Carnival
but it's about how as an
historian I can come to study it through
the
filters which themselves Mark its
instrumentalization
um wait
oh yep I was wondering about um
saturnalia because I think that was I
was looking up about RAB and I think
that that's mentioned a bit apparently
it was the most popular celebration
before Christianity in in Europe a lot
of Europe and one of the things they did
was um they made these joke gifts so
like they would give sort of joke gifts
you know spend time making them and then
give these joke things to their friends
and family and it was an insult to to
have something kind of wellmade or
anything it was always sort of sort
derogatory right uh you know insults to
to them because that showed that they
were close enough to sort of uh you know
uh didn't make an insult but keep
friends you know
so and then that became our Christmas
right you know and and
really yeah yeah oh wow I didn't know
that pres
wow they apparently it's the one
Festival that they couldn't cancel
because it was so popular so they made
Christ's birth on that day you know
around the day I don't know like is that
se is also an inversion because it's
where the Lords of the house behave
servants to the serpants
and it was also a youth Le set of
celebrations it was it was taken away as
said were as a as a Civic celebration
from the magistrates from the the town
authorities and it was really
orchestrated uh by by informal
associations uh of young people but it
it corresponds so when when we talk
about when I talk about Carnival
as uh
um as a calendrical festival I mean
there there's a broad and narrow sense
to that but the narrow sense is if you
follow strictly speaking the Christian
calendar and then Carnival becomes the
period of 40 days before lent from Fat
Tuesday until lent and so that's
variable according to year and so on
when I was looking at peasant society
and trying to make sense of the festive
calendar over the course of the year I
saw
that uh
activities uh that were enacting the
carnivalesque that is
inversion
laughter the world upside down
subversion false
Kings false trials false gifts all of
the parodies of the institutions of high
culture that they really went from
uh late November early December uh
through Christmas and so uh sorry
through um Easter and Beyond to include
the May
festivals which uh we have remnants of
even in modern society as Mayday May
poles and the like which were also youth
driven festivals that were very much
orchestrated around issues of fertility
reproduction in other words it was the
winter
season right basically December to
May and those festivals which included
Carnival which included Easter which was
you know until the 17 century was the
beginning of the
year and which itself and here you have
to correct bakine a little bit because
Easter
laughter the inversion uh festivities
surrounding Easter in which uh the
clerics would be displaced in the church
by young men who would set up parodies
of uh of the Christian rituals were
actually uh condoned and tolerated as
part
of uh the the calendrical cycle of feast
like that they were not prohibited until
the late 16th and 17th century
so the Feast of pools is what uh what he
calls it generically in um in Ran's
world so that whole cycle stood very
much opposed in uh rural Society to the
cycle of Feasts which took place from
the early summer until November which
were the patron saint
festivals and I went and I actually
counted you know the number in a given
region of and plotted the patron saint
festivals on the calendar it turns out
you know they're
clustered in August and then in October
and then St Martin's
Day November 11th and so on and those
festivals although they have elements of
the carnival es every Festival does but
predominantly structured by The Village
authorities The Village priests the
hierarchy you know orchestrating the
kind of official version of society as
it were so when I talk about the
contrast and when I'm
asking B to think more about which is
the
temporal understanding of car it's not
to restrict Carnival to that short
lurgical
cycle but to understand that even though
the carnival LK might appear in the
fairs which are outside of the cycle or
in the marketplace or whatever that the
principal structuring principles of the
organization of festive
activities divide the year into two but
isn't that to a large degree because you
for we in industrial society to imagine
that winter is the holiday is a bit
difficult we go on holiday in summer but
for Negan Society you work through the
summer and then winter comes and you've
got to entertain yourself in one way or
another that potentially begins to
explain why the peasants organize their
festivals themselves in the winter right
but the other festivals are organized um
top down um during the summer yeah but
yeah so what what also very interesting
if I ask question is uh uh I I would
like you to talk about this political
language and this change of perspective
and you like when we were talking before
you were talking with threee very major
points one about uh reclaiming the light
the rights to refer to the history for
left that is now uh rightwing people
only uh have yeah in Russia we have this
U something called scra how would
translate
that scra yeah something like a chain
like I don't know how who yeah some like
this is official language so of uh of
you know power we are we are
representing the the tradition the you
know the real Humanity the way how we
all should live and so on and yeah so
the the carnivalesque with like a very
different idea of what is uh what is
human being and what is the relationship
between humans and hum sense Society is
actually like super historical things
happens in every society in in the
world so that's that's one thing and it
was another two we go with the other two
that's that's yeah the other was the
second one was uh what we were talking
about change in political langage MH uh
that is happening in any way but uh
basically like you saying we have to be
very explicit about attacking our
enemies that is you know this um uh
rationalism that happens in
1700s that just kind of you know
defeated this Enchanted universe and the
forest as a metaphor of a different way
of living so that's the political
language is is like very important that
I would like to talk but then the third
things exactly about this Enchanted
universe and how should we relate to
that because we still we all people from
from you know industrial societies we
had this like you know I got a Soviet
education like when I hear somebody
talking about you know fedus I'm just
like you know it's difficult for me to
to kind of to find a way to relate to
that
I you know on your on your first point
about the historical connection if you
look at western African societies where
there are more carnivals as well there
is a big carnival in World part hard
cour and we can see that like a bit of
an evolution of the traditional
masquerades that are inside like all the
traditional R and there are more seen
now in a more modern LS so I think like
in the European Society it's a bit
trickier to see but in the African
countries there is much more of a
link yeah uh
yeah I have never been there so I don't
have any clue about
I mean I think all of your
points speak to the question broadly
that's being posed in the third
one which is how do we develop
alternative
ways of thinking and
acting uh when the world has passed them
by that is the Scientific Revolution
modern society and so on and you
know I'm not
advocating in any way for just this kind
of simple
enactment of a golden age in the past
but I do think that all of us even as
moderns in different ways whether
it's in the fian world of Dreams or the
festive world of Carnival
acknowledge at different moments in our
lives
realities and ideas and eventually
practices which are not contained in in
the world of abstract Universal
reason I mean entire Industries would be
out
of practice if we if we all really
believe that and lived in that
way so the question is how to
capture the irrationality as it
were and harness it for productive
political
purposes and there it seems to me that
you know festivity is a has an important
role to
play I'll just say that provocatively
and see what
happens Claire
ask you if if you think that there's um
contemporary youth culture that is
creating that now I mean like do you
think um I don't know I can't I'm I'm
showing my age now but something like
Rave culture is that is that um
equivocal in any way to the idea of
Carnival that youed in the way that
you're talking about
it well I think I'm I'm even further
from it than you are and
uh there are Mas that are being used in
R and it's more like I think about to
hidees from other people raav to hide
like in a certain sense because they
when they use mask they really cover
themselves up and there there is nothing
you can see in their in their faces so I
think in a certain sense it's not like
to share but like more to separate thems
from from that's how I saw them
well from what I hear I
mean I mean you know Rave culture with
its um supportive pharmacological
elements like
Molly is about dissolving the boundaries
of you know everyday life and relations
and finding some kind of
collective joy and experience now is
that carnivalesque is it the same thing
as Carnival not sure but it certainly
presents itself as an
alternative uh in that way is it
productive
of you know what's productive productive
in the sense of
empowering in the sense
of socially effective or consequential
in that sense does it change
anything I I'm not sure I mean I'm
really I'm too far from that world to to
pass
judgment um but one can always be
hopeful right but actually CLI and I was
talking recently and he was saying that
whatever Extinction Rebellion did on his
Bridges was definitely Carnaval first of
all people all dress up you know and
like it was definitely clearly uh
disturbance of the existing order and
all like I think if you have a check
list of what is carnivalesque that will
pass so oh I want to show you something
we have here John we don't have Clive
maybe he's online I don't know but uh so
this is an apartment art
exhibition um that is opening tomorrow
calls Carnival not war maybe I should go
downstairs and so it's better but like
now it will be in a in a five minutes it
will start the reading group in another
Zoom about uh B but then we were
thinking today with Clive that um if you
compare design and
um and Contemporary Art in a way design
is very much according to B um
uh carnavalesque and U not sorry I just
drink too much wine so according to B um
the high culture is inherit and ramantic
and um uh full culture is not so that's
like we we were like thinking about
distinction between uh design and
Contemporary Art and had some thoughts
but maybe I'm too uh
yeah to to it's too quickly for me to to
formalize to formalize them so should we
should we close this session because we
have a reading group soon we have what
reading
group yeah so we did it like
yeah oh my God somebody like wrote a
long comment oh slowa you have a
question hey sorry about
that uh there's also a question maybe
you can
reading
SCH hey can you hear me yes um my
question was basically um you know how
Notting Hill Carnival started as a
protest and pride started as a protest
do you think that it's a it's a shame
that we sometimes Miss we forget about
that that's my
question
um but it's not always a protest
right I mean it can be and when it is we
tend to fixate on it and applauded and
celebrate it but I I guess the the the
way I was trying to think about it is
that when it when it's a proest that's
when it's that's when we're or whoever
is instrumentalizing it and using it for
something now it turns out it can be
used for something because it has a
character that may lend itself to those
uses but that doesn't mean that that
character of the thing in of itself is a
protest or is subversive the uses to
which it's put can be often are not
always but uh it's not inherent in the
thing so I guess that's where I'm that's
where I'm distancing myself a little bit
from um a more strict you know
bakian interpretation
can I can I answer that so I think that
there are many um versions of how and
why Notting Hill Carnival began and if
you speak to different carnivalist you
have very very different answers I have
one friend who was one of the first
carnivalist and he talks about um
talking to some of the Black Panther
people in Notting Hill at that time who
were talking about guns and his response
was we don't need guns we need music and
laughter because because that will unite
people um Peter Mitchell who was a
Trinidadian carnivalist um who was one
of the first people to put a costume ban
um on the Streets of London um he
deliberately made the faces many colors
because what he didn't want to do was to
create a carnival that was africaribbean
or anything he wanted to be a carnival
that anybody could come to um if you
talk to every Carnival who was around at
the time they probably have a different
story for how it started and I think
that really is the spirit of Carnival